Specify organic description of CGMs (DataBiosphere/azul#2894) (#9)
HumanCellAtlas/dcp2: docs/dcp2_system_design.rst

Project-level matrices
======================

In the context of the HCA DCP, a matrix is a two-dimensional structure relating
individual cell identities (or an approximation thereof) to properties of the
the transcriptome of those cells e.g., genes expressed in the transcriptome,
number of those cells.

A *project-level* matrix is a matrix that covers all or a large subset of the
cells involved in the experiments for a particular project. A project-level
matrix is *stratified* if it is partitioned over separate files, using certain
criteria on the properties of the experiments in a project or the cells studied
in those experiments.

A matrix from a contributor or any other source external to the DCP is refered
to as a *contributor-generated* matrix.

> Contributor-generated matrices (CGMs)

Reviewer: I think we need a better name for this entity as the files that we want to attach in this way include both matrices as well as cell type annotation files that may be linked to matrices, but are not matrices themselves.

Author: Agreed but that would be fairly disruptive because we the term "CGM" has been pretty much established. We can change the definition though to include these supporting files.

Author: Addressed.

   that file may have a more up-to-date list

Describing CGMs as analysis files
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The mechanism defined in `Describing CGMs as supplementary files`_ is
deprecated. Instead of representing a contributor-generated matrix (CGM) as a
stand-alone supplementary file, it is described more accurately as an

> ``analysis_file`` entity that is an output of an ``analysis_process`` entity.

Reviewer 2: Ingest are not using ‘analysis_process’ as the entity to output an ‘analysis_file’. We are using ‘process’. 

This is because ‘[analysis_process](https://github.com/HumanCellAtlas/metadata-schema/blob/master/json_schema/type/process/analysis/analysis_process.json)’ has a number of different fields which are required that we do not believe we will be able to capture from contributors on an effective cost-value ratio. Hence we made the decision early on to use ‘process’ rather than ‘analysis_process’. 

Hopefully this doesn’t cause any significant issues - but please let us know if this causes any unexpected burden to Azul!

Author: Happy to change that. It was more of an oversight on my part than a deliberate choice.

Reviewer 2: Thank you!

Author: Addressed.

Information about the provenance of the CGMs for a particular project may be
limited. The DCP/2 may not be in possession of intermediate artifacts like the
sequence data or any information about those artifacts because, for example,
they are subject to access restrictions the DCP/2 does not yet have the
capabilities to enforce. Even if the DCP/2 is in possession of intermediate
artifacts and knows their provenance, their bearing on the contributed
matrices may not have been supplied.

Either way, the subgraph(s) containing CGM analysis files may need to be an
approximation. If they are, the ``analysis_process`` entity that lists one or
more CGMs as its output will not have any sequence files or other intermediate
matrice files as inputs — as they would in the case of `DCP/2-generated
matrices`_ — but instead directly refer to biomaterial entities like

> ``specimen_from_organism``, ``cellline`` or ``organoid`` as its input,

Reviewer: Should be ``cell_line`` (I don't have the ability to make commit suggestions). 
I think the most likely scenario for linking direct to a biomaterial will be ``cell_suspension`` so might make sense to use that as one of the examples. 
There is also a typo 'matrice files' -> 'matrix files'

Author: Once you accept the invitation I sent, you should be able to make suggestions.

Author: Addressed.

skipping the sequence files and any intermediate matrices.

Consequently, the Azul indexer extends its definition of *sample* to include
not only biomaterials that are used as sequencing inputs but also any

> biomaterials linked directly to such an approximate `analysis_process` entity.

Reviewer: tl;dr: Based on my understanding of how Azul currently creates 'samples', I think this definition could result in varying definitions of a 'sample' depending on how we model an experiment, even if the real world processes of the experiment are the same, which I am not sure is ideal. 

I believe Azul currently considers the 'sample' the input of the input to the `sequencing_file`, but the above sentence says samples are 'sequencing inputs'. Are we proposing to change the definition of a 'sample' to the direct input before either a `sequencing_file` or an `analysis_file` (if directly linked to a biomaterial)? If I have understood this correctly I go into more detail below, if I haven't, then disregard.

For example if we consider a standard 10X primary tissue experiment with
`donor_organism`->`specimen_from_organism`->`cell_suspension`->`sequencing_file`->`analysis_file(CGM)`
In this case, I thought Azul considered the `specimen_from_organism` to be the sample.
Whereas if we consider a managed access experiment, that has the same real world experimental structure (10X primary tissue), but we don't have access to the sequencing files so don't explicitly model them, it would be 
`donor_organism`->`specimen_from_organism`->`cell_suspension`->`analysis_file(CGM)`
and based on a sample being 'directly linked to the `analysis_process`', the `cell_suspension` would be classified as the 'sample'. 

I am not sure if it is possible to have a simple linking rule to define a 'sample', avoid an inconsistent definition, while maintaining the flexibility to link any biomaterial to an `analysis_file`, so maybe we just accept this will happen, but wanted to point it out anyways since it might confuse consumers. In the browser the sample type field is described as 'the type of biomaterial used to create the cell suspension' so maybe we need to redefine that, or use some kind of more complex logic like, if there is a cell suspension, the sample is the input to the cell suspension, if there isn't a cell suspension, the sample is the biomaterial input to the first file in the subgraph (whether sequence or analysis). 

I also don't think it is correct to insinuate that a biomaterial that is linked directly to an `analysis_process` is not a sequencing input, since the `analysis_process` would often be described by a `sequencing_protocol` and in the real world probably was a sequencing input. The difference here is that it doesn't result in a `sequencing_file` as an output. Perhaps something like 'not only biomaterials that result in a `sequencing_file` as an output, but also any biomaterials...'

Author: What I wrote is not correct and I will fix it. A sample as currently defined in Azul is the nearest biomaterial ancestor of a sequence_file that is not a cell suspension. This is the definition that was agreed on with EBI folks in the room at a F2F in Santa Cruz. 

Sequencing input is currently defined as any biomaterial that is an input to a process with a sequencing protocol. Usually that's a cell suspension but I was told that it sometimes can be a liquid specimen like a drop of blood. I think we may need to adjust that definition, too. I think we simply don't know what the sequencing input is in these approximate graphs.

So let me make those changes and we take it from there, ok?

Author: Addressed.

If information is available about the protocols used in the experiment
yielding the CGMs, that information is captured in protocol entities such as

> ``sequencing_protocol`` or ``library_construction_protocol`` and those

Reviewer: should be ``library_preparation_protocol``

Author: Addressed.

   that file may have a more up-to-date list

Describing CGMs as analysis files
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The mechanism defined in `Describing CGMs as supplementary files`_ is
deprecated. Instead of representing a contributor-generated matrix (CGM) as a
stand-alone supplementary file, it is described more accurately as an
``analysis_file`` entity that is an output of a ``process`` entity.

Information about the provenance of the CGMs for a particular project may be
limited. The DCP/2 may not be in possession of intermediate artifacts like the
sequence data or any information about those artifacts because, for example,
they are subject to access restrictions the DCP/2 does not yet have the
capabilities to enforce. Even if the DCP/2 is in possession of intermediate
artifacts and knows their provenance, their bearing on the contributed

> matrices may not have been supplied.

Reviewer 3: optional: do we want to include any disclaimers about batch correction here? a question for a scientific stakeholder almost.

Author: I think so but I wouldn't know what to write. Do you want to suggest specific language? Or should we ping someone who knows?

Reviewer 4: I believe @ekiernan recently drafted this text for the portal for the disclaimer for the purposes of bulk download:

> **Interpret with caution: Data is not corrected for batch effects nor normalized across projects

Author: https://github.com/HumanCellAtlas/dcp2/issues/18

Either way, the subgraph(s) containing CGM analysis files may need to be an
approximation. If they are, the ``process`` entity that lists one or more CGMs
as its output will not have any sequence files or other intermediate matrix
files as inputs — as they would in the case of `DCP/2-generated matrices`_ —
but instead directly refer to biomaterial entities like
``specimen_from_organism``, ``cell_line`` or ``organoid`` as its input,
skipping the sequence files and any intermediate matrices.

Consequently, the Azul indexer extends its definition of *sample* as the nearest
biomaterial ancestor of a sequence file that is not a cell suspension to also
include biomaterials linked directly to such an approximate ``process`` entity.

Azul previously defined *sequencing input* as any input biomaterial to a
process with a sequencing protocol. Usually that is a cell suspension, but it
could also be liquid specimen like a drop of blood. The previous definition of
*sequencing input* matches input biomaterials to the approximate CGM
``process`` entity because that process refers to a ``sequencing_protocol``
entity. The approximate CGM subgraph is likely to elide any cell

> suspensionsand it may not be known if a specimen was used directly as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
suspensions and it may not be known if a specimen was used directly as
```

Author: Addressed;

biomaterial ancestor of a sequence file that is not a cell suspension to also
include biomaterials linked directly to such an approximate ``process`` entity.

Azul previously defined *sequencing input* as any input biomaterial to a

> process with a sequencing protocol. Usually that is a cell suspension, but it

Author: @clairerye
